EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

Brussels, 10.1.2017
COM(2017) 10 final
2017/0003 (COD)

Proposal for a
REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
concerning the respect for private life and the protection of personal data in electronic
communications and repealing Directive 2002/58/EC (Regulation on Privacy and
Electronic Communications)

(Text with EEA relevance)
{SWD(2017) 3 final}
{SWD(2017) 4 final}
{SWD(2017) 5 final}
{SWD(2017) 6 final}

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
1.

CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

1.1.

Reasons for and objectives of the proposal

The Digital Single Market Strategy ("DSM Strategy")1 has as an objective to increase trust in
and the security of digital services. The reform of the data protection framework, and in
particular the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the General Data Protection Regulation
("GDPR")2, was a key action to this end. The DSM Strategy also announced the review of
Directive 2002/58/EC ("ePrivacy Directive")3 in order to provide a high level of privacy
protection for users of electronic communications services and a level playing field for all
market players. This proposal reviews the ePrivacy Directive, foreseeing in the DSM Strategy
objectives and ensuring consistency with the GDPR.
The ePrivacy Directive ensures the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, in
particular the respect for private life, confidentiality of communications and the protection of
personal data in the electronic communications sector. It also guarantees the free movement
of electronic communications data, equipment and services in the Union. It implements in the
Union's secondary law the fundamental right to the respect for private life, with regard to
communications, as enshrined in Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union ("Charter").
In line with the 'Better Regulation' requirements, the Commission carried out an ex post
Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme ("REFIT evaluation") of the ePrivacy
Directive. It follows from the evaluation that the objectives and principles of the current
framework remain sound. However, important technological and economic developments
took place in the market since the last revision of the ePrivacy Directive in 2009. Consumers
and businesses increasingly rely on new internet-based services enabling inter-personal
communications such as Voice over IP, instant messaging and web-based e-mail services,
instead of traditional communications services. These Over-the-Top communications services
("OTTs") are in general not subject to the current Union electronic communications
framework, including the ePrivacy Directive. Accordingly, the Directive has not kept pace
with technological developments, resulting in a void of protection of communications
conveyed through new services.
1.2.

Consistency with existing policy provisions in the policy area

This proposal is lex specialis to the GDPR and will particularise and complement it as regards
electronic communications data that qualify as personal data. All matters concerning the
processing of personal data not specifically addressed by the proposal are covered by the
GDPR. The alignment with the GDPR resulted in the repeal of some provisions, such as the
security obligations of Article 4 of the ePrivacy Directive.

1

2

3

Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, A Digital Single Market Strategy
for Europe, COM(2015) 192 final.
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (OJ L 119, 4.5.2016,
p. 1–88).
Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector
(Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p.37).

1.3.

Consistency with other Union policies

The ePrivacy Directive is part of the regulatory framework for electronic communications. In
2016, the Commission adopted the proposal for a Directive establishing the European
Electronic Communications Code ("EECC")4, which revises the framework. While the
present proposal is not an integral part of the EECC, it partially relies on definitions provided
therein, including that of 'electronic communications services'. Like the EECC, this proposal
also brings OTT providers in its scope to reflect the market reality. In addition, the EECC
complements this proposal by ensuring the security of electronic communications services.
The Radio Equipment Directive 2014/53/EU ("RED")5 ensures a single market for radio
equipment. In particular, it requires that, before being placed on the market, radio equipment
must incorporate safeguards to ensure that the personal data and privacy of the user are
protected. Under the RED and the European Standardisation Regulation (EU) 1025/20126, the
Commission is empowered to adopt measures. This proposal does not affect the RED.
The proposal does not include any specific provisions in the field of data retention. It
maintains the substance of Article 15 of the ePrivacy Directive and aligns it with specific
wording of Article 23 of the GDPR, which provides grounds for Member States to restrict the
scope of the rights and obligations in specific articles of the ePrivacy Directive. Therefore,
Member States are free to keep or create national data retention frameworks that provide,
inter alia, for targeted retention measures, in so far as such frameworks comply with Union
law, taking into account the case-law of the Court of Justice on the interpretation of the
ePrivacy Directive and the Charter of Fundamental Rights7.
Finally, the proposal does not apply to activities of Union institutions, bodies and agencies.
However, its principles and relevant obligations as to the right to respect for private life and
communications in relation to the processing of electronic communications data have been
included in the Proposal for a Regulation repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/20018.
2.

LEGAL BASIS, SUBSIDIARITY AND PROPORTIONALITY

2.1.

Legal basis

Article 16 and Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU")
are the relevant legal bases for the proposal.
Article 16 TFEU introduces a specific legal basis for the adoption of rules relating to the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by Union institutions,
by Member States when carrying out activities falling within the scope of Union law, and
4
5

6

7

8

Commission proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the
European Electronic Communications Code (Recast) (COM/2016/0590 final - 2016/0288 (COD)).
Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the
harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of radio
equipment and repealing Directive 1999/5/EC (OJ L 153, 22.5.2014, p. 62–106).
Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
European standardisation, amending Council Directives 89/686/EEC and 93/15/EEC and Directives
94/9/EC, 94/25/EC, 95/16/EC, 97/23/EC, 98/34/EC, 2004/22/EC, 2007/23/EC, 2009/23/EC and
2009/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Decision
87/95/EEC and Decision No 1673/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 316,
14.11.2012, p. 12–33).
See Joined Cases C-293/12 and C-594/12 Digital Rights Ireland and Seitlinger and Others,
ECLI:EU:C:2014:238; Joined Cases C-203/15 and C-698/15 Tele2 Sverige AB and Secretary of State
for the Home Department, ECLI:EU:C:2016:970.
Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community
institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1–22).

rules relating to the free movement of such data. Since an electronic communication involving
a natural person will normally qualify as personal data, the protection of natural persons with
regard to the privacy of communications and processing of such data, should be based on
Article 16.
In addition, the proposal aims at protecting communications and related legitimate interests of
legal persons. The meaning and scope of the rights under Article 7 of the Charter shall, in
accordance with Article 52(3) of the Charter, be the same as those laid down in Article 8(1) of
the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
("ECHR"). As regards the scope of Article 7 of the Charter, the case-law of the Court of
Justice of the European Union ("CJEU")9 and of the European Court of Human Rights10
confirm that professional activities of legal persons may not be excluded from the protection
of the right guaranteed by Article 7 of the Charter and Article 8 of the ECHR.
Since the initiative pursues a twofold purpose and that the component concerning the
protection of communications of legal persons and the aim of achieving the internal market
for those electronic communications and ensure its functioning in this regard cannot be
considered merely incidental, the initiative should, therefore, also be based on Article 114 of
the TFEU.
2.2.

Subsidiarity

Respect for communications is a fundamental right recognised in the Charter. Content of
electronic communications may reveal highly sensitive information about the end-users
involved in the communication. Similarly, metadata derived from electronic communications,
may also reveal very sensitive and personal information, as expressely recognised by the
CJEU11. The majority of Member States also recognise the need to protect communications as
a distinct constitutional right. Whilst it is possible for Member States to enact policies which
ensure that this right is not breached, this would not be achieved in a uniform way in the
absence of Union rules and would create restrictions on cross-border flows of personal and
non-personal data related to the use of electronic communications services. Finally, to
maintain consistency with the GDPR, it is necessary to review the ePrivacy Directive and
adopt measures to bring the two instruments in line.
The technological developments and the ambitions of the DSM strategy have strengthened the
case for action at the Union level. The success of the EU DSM depends on how effectively
the EU brings down national silos and barriers and seize the advantages and economies of a
European digital single market. Moreover, as internet and digital technologies know no
borders, the dimension of the problem goes beyond the territory of a single Member State.
Member States cannot effectively solve the problems in the current situation. A level playing
field for economic operators providing substitutable services and equal protection of endusers at Union level are requirements for the DSM to work properly.
2.3.

Proportionality

To ensure the effective legal protection of respect for privacy and communications, an
extension of scope to cover OTT providers is necessary. While several popular OTT providers
already comply, or partially comply with the principle of confidentiality of communications,
the protection of fundamental rights cannot be left to self-regulation by industry. Also, the
9
10

11

See C-450/06 Varec SA, ECLI:EU:C:2008:91, §48.
See, inter alia, ECHR, judgments Niemietz v Germany, judgment of 16 December 1992, Series A n°
251-B, §29; Société Colas Est and Others v France, no 37971/97, §41; ECHR 2002-III; Peck v The
United Kingdom no 44647/98, §57, ECHR 2003-I; and also Vinci Construction and GTM Génie Civil et
Services v. France, n°s. 63629/10 and 60567/10, § 63, 2 April 2015.
See footnote 7.

importance of the effective protection of privacy of terminal equipment is increasing as it has
become indispensable in personal and professional life for the storage of sensitive
information. The implementation of the ePrivacy Directive has not been effective to empower
end-users. Therefore the implementation of the principle by centralising consent in software
and prompting users with information about the privacy settings thereof, is necessary to
achieve the aim. Regarding the enforcement of this Regulation, it relies on the supervisory
authorities and the consistency mechanism of the GDPR. Moreover, the proposal allows
Member States to take national derogatory measures for specific legitimate purposes. Thus,
the proposal does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the aims and complies with the
principle of proportionality as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. The
obligations put on affected services are kept to a level as minimum as possible, while not
impinging on the fundamental rights concerned.
2.4.

Choice of the instrument

The Commission puts forward a proposal for a Regulation in order to ensure consistency with
the GDPR and legal certainty for users and businesses alike by avoiding divergent
interpretation in the Member States. A Regulation can ensure an equal level of protection
throughout the Union for users and lower compliance costs for businesses operating across
borders.
3.

RESULTS
OF
EX-POST
EVALUATIONS,
CONSULTATIONS AND IMPACT ASSESSMENTS

3.1.

Ex-post evaluations/fitness checks of existing legislation

STAKEHOLDER

The REFIT evaluation examined how efficiently the ePrivacy Directive has contributed to an
adequate protection of the respect for private life and confidentiality of communications in the
EU. It also sought to identify possible redundancies.
The REFIT evaluation concluded that the above objectives of the Directive remain relevant.
While the GDPR ensures the protection of personal data, the ePrivacy Directive ensures the
confidentiality of communications, which may also contain non-personal data and data related
to a legal person. Therefore, a separate instrument should ensure an effective protection of
Article 7 of the Charter. Other provisions, such as the rules on the sending of unsolicited
marketing communications, have proven to remain relevant too.
In terms of effectiveness and efficiency, the REFIT evaluation found that the Directive has
not fully met its objectives. The unclear drafting of certain provisions and ambiguity in legal
concepts have jeopardized harmonization, thereby creating challenges for businesses to
operate cross-border. The evaluation further showed that some provisions have created an
unnecessary burden on businesses and consumers. For example, the consent rule to protect the
confidentiality of terminal equipment failed to reach its objectives as end-users face requests
to accept tracking cookies without understanding their meaning and, in some cases, are even
exposed to cookies being set without their consent. The consent rule is over-inclusive, as it
also covers non-privacy intrusive practices, and under-inclusive, as it does not clearly cover
some tracking techniques (e.g. device fingerprinting) which may not entail access/storage in
the device. Finally, its implementation can be costly for businesses.
The evaluation concluded that the ePrivacy rules still have EU added-value for better
achieving the objective of ensuring online privacy in the light of an increasingly transnational
electronic communications market. It also demonstrated that overall the rules are coherent
with other relevant legislation, although a few redundancies have been identified vis-à-vis the
new GDPR (see in Section 1.2).

3.2.

Stakeholder consultations

The Commission organised a public consultation between 12 April and 5 July 2016 and
received 421 replies12. The key findings are the following13:
–

Need for special rules for the electronic communications sector on
confidentiality of electronic communications: 83.4% of the responding citizens,
consumer and civil society organisations and 88.9% of public authorities agree, while
63.4% of industry respondents do not agree.

–

Extension of scope to new communications services (OTTs): 76% of citizens and
civil society and 93.1% of public authorities agree, while only 36.2% of respondents
from industry favour such an extension.

–

Amending the exemptions to consent for processing traffic and location data:
49.1% of citizens, consumer and civil society organisations and 36% of public
authorities prefer not to broaden the exemptions, while 36% of the industry favour
extended exemptions and 2/3 of industry advocate the mere repeal of the provisions.

–

Support for solutions proposed to the cookie consent issue: 81.2% of citizens and
63% of public authorities support imposing obligations on manufacturers of terminal
equipment to market products with privacy-by-default settings activated, while
58.3% of industry favour the option to support self/co-regulation.

In addition, the European Commission organised two workshops in April 2016, one open to
all stakeholders and one open to national competent authorities, addressing the main questions
of the public consultations. The views expressed during the workshops reflected the outcome
of the public consultation.
To obtain views from citizens, a Eurobarometer survey on ePrivacy14 was conducted
throughout the EU. The key findings are the following15:
–

78% say it is very important that personal information on their computer, smartphone
or tablet can only be accessed with their permission.

–

72% state that it is very important that the confidentiality of their e-mails and online
instant messaging is guaranteed.

–

89% agree with the suggested option that the default settings of their browser should
stop the sharing of their information.

3.3.

Collection and use of expertise

The Commission relied on the following external expert advice:
–

Targeted consultations of EU expert groups: Opinion of the Article 29 Working
Party; Opinion of the EDPS; Opinion of the REFIT Platform; views of BEREC;
views of ENISA and views of members of the Consumer Protection and Cooperation
Network.

–

External expertise, particularly the following two studies:

12
13
14
15

162 contributions from citizens, 33 from civil society and consumer organisations; 186 from industry
and 40 from public authorities, including competent authorities enforcing the ePrivacy Directive.
The full report is available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/news-redirect/37204.
2016 Eurobarometer survey (EB) 443 on e-Privacy (SMART 2016/079).
The full report is available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/news-redirect/37205.

3.4.

–

Study "ePrivacy Directive: assessment of transposition, effectiveness and
compatibility with proposed Data Protection Regulation" (SMART
2013/007116).

–

Study "Evaluation and review of Directive 2002/58 on privacy and the
electronic communication sector" (SMART 2016/0080).

Impact assessment

An impact assessment was carried out for this proposal on which on 28 September 2016, the
Regulatory Scrutiny Board issued a positive opinion16. To address the recommendations of
the Board, the impact assessment explains better the scope of the initiative, its coherence with
other legal instruments (GDPR, EECC, RED) and the need for a separate instrument. The
baseline scenario is further developed and clarified. The analysis of the impacts is
strengthened and made more balanced, clarifying and reinforcing the description of the
expected costs and benefits.
The following policy options were examined against the criteria of effectiveness, efficiency
and coherence:
–

Option 1: Non-legislative ("soft law") measures;

–

Option 2: Limited reinforcement of privacy/confidentiality and simplification;

–

Option 3: Measured reinforcement of privacy/confidentiality and simplification;

–

Option 4: Far reaching reinforcement of privacy/confidentiality and simplification;

–

Option 5: Repeal of the ePrivacy Directive.

Option 3 was, in most aspects, singled out as the preferred option to achieve the objectives,
while taking into account its efficiency and coherence. The main benefits are:
–

Enhancing protection of confidentiality of electronic communications by extending
the scope of the legal instrument to include new functionally equivalent electronic
communications services. In addition, the Regulation enhances end-user's control by
clarifying that consent can be expressed through appropriate technical settings.

–

Enhancing protection against unsolicited communications, with the introduction of
an obligation to provide the calling line identification or a mandatory prefix for
marketing calls and the enhanced possibilities to block calls from unwanted numbers.

–

Simplifying and clarifying the regulatory environment, by reducing the margin of
manoeuvre left to Member States, repealing outdated provisions and the broadening
of the exceptions to the consent rules.

The economic impact of Option 3 is expected to be overall proportionate to the aims of the
proposal. Business opportunities related to the processing of communications data are opened
up for traditional electronic communications services, while OTT providers become subject to
the same rules. This implies some additional compliance costs for these operators. However,
this change will not substantially affect those OTTs that already operate on the basis of
consent. Finally, the impact of the option would not be felt in the Member States that have
extended these rules to OTTs already.
By centralising the consent in software such as internet browsers and prompting users to
choose their privacy settings and expanding the exceptions to the cookie consent rule, a
significant proportion of businesses would be able to do away with cookie banners and
notices, thus leading to potentially significant cost savings and simplification. However, it
16

http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/?fuseaction=ia.

may become more difficult for online targeted advertisers to obtain consent if a large
proportion of users opt for "reject third party cookies" settings. At the same time, centralising
consent does not deprive website operators from the possibility to obtain consent by means of
individual requests to end-users and thus maintain their current business model. Additional
costs would ensue for some providers of browsers or similar software as these would need to
ensure privacy-friendly settings.
The external study identified three distinct implementation scenarios of Option 3, according to
the entity who will establish the dialogue box between the user having chosen "reject third
party cookies" or "do-not-track" settings and websites visited wishing the internet user to
reconsider his/her choice. The entities who could be put in charge of this technical task are: 1)
software such as internet browsers; 2) the third party tracker; 3) the individual websites (i.e.
information society service requested by the user). Option 3 would lead to overall savings in
terms of compliance cost compared to baseline scenario of 70% (€948.8 million savings) in
the first scenario (browser solution), implemented in this proposal. Cost savings would be
lower in other scenarios. As overall savings largely derive from a very significant decrease of
the number of affected businesses, the individual amount of compliance costs for one business
is expected to incur – on average – would be higher than today.
3.5.

Regulatory fitness and simplification

The policy measures proposed under the preferred option address the objective of
simplification and reduction of administrative burden, in line with the findings of the REFIT
evaluation and Opinion of the REFIT Platform17.
The REFIT Platform issued three sets of recommendations to the Commission:
–

The protection of citizen's private life should be strengthened through an alignment
of the ePrivacy Directive with the General Data Protection Regulation;

–

The effectiveness of citizens protections against unsolicited marketing should be
enhanced by adding exceptions to the ‘consent’ rule for cookies;

–

The Commission addresses national implementation problems and facilitates the
exchange of best practice amongst Member States.

The proposal include specifically:
–

Use of technologically neutral definitions to apprehend new services and
technologies to ensure that the Regulation is future-proof;

–

Repeal of the security rules to eliminate regulatory duplication;

–

Clarification of scope to help eliminate/reduce the risk of divergent implementation
by Member States (point 3 of the Opinion);

–

Clarification and simplification of the consent rule for the use of cookies and other
identifiers, as explained in Sections 3.1 and 3.4 (point 2 of the Opinion);

–

Alignment of the supervisory authorities with the authorities competent to enforce
the GDPR and reliance on the consistency mechanism of the GDPR.

3.6.

Impact on fundamental rights

The proposal aims to make more effective and increase the level of protection of privacy and
personal data processed in relation with electronic communications in accordance with
Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter and ensure greater legal certainty. The proposal complements
and particularises the GDPR. Effective protection of the confidentiality of communications is
17

http://ec.europa.eu/smart-regulation/refit/refit-platform/docs/recommendations/opinion_comm_net.pdf.

essential for exercising the freedom of expression and information and other related rights,
such as the right to personal data protection or the freedom of thought, conscience and
religion.
4.

BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS

The proposal has no implications for the Union budget.
5.

OTHER ELEMENTS

5.1.

Implementation plans and monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements

The Commission will monitor the application of the Regulation and submit a report on its
evaluation to the European Parliament and to the Council and the European Economic and
Social Committee every three years. These reports will be public and detail the effective
application and enforcement of this Regulation.
5.2.

Detailed explanation of the specific provisions of the proposal

Chapter I contains the general provisions: the subject matter (Article 1), the scope (Articles 2
and 3) and its definitions, including references to relevant definitions from other EU
instruments, such as the GDPR.
Chapter II contains the key provisions ensuring the confidentiality of electronic
communications (Article 5) and the limited permitted purposes and conditions of processing
such communications data (Articles 6 and 7). It also addresses the protection of terminal
equipment, by (i) guaranteeing the integrity of the information stored in it and (ii) protecting
information emitted from terminal equipment, as it may enable the identification of its enduser (Article 8). Finally, Article 9 details the consent of end-users, a central lawful ground of
this Regulation, expressly referring to its definition and conditions as provided by the GDPR,
while Article 10 imposes an obligation on providers of software permitting electronic
communications to help end-users in making effective choices about privacy settings. Article
11 details the purposes and conditions for Member States to restrict the above provisions.
Chapter III concerns the rights of end-users to control the sending and reception of electronic
communications to protect their privacy: (i) the right of end-users to prevent the presentation
of the calling line identification to guarantee anonymity (Article 12), with its limitations
(Article 13); and (ii) the obligation for providers of publicly available number-based
interpersonal communication to provide for the possibility to limit the reception of unwanted
calls (Article 14). This Chapter also regulates the conditions under which end-users may be
included in publicly available directories (Article 15) and the conditions under which
unsolicited communications for direct marketing may be conducted (Article 17). It also relates
to security risks and provides for an obligation upon providers of electronic communications
services to alert end-users in case of a particular risk that may compromise the security of
networks and services. The security obligations in the GDPR and in the EECC will apply to
the providers of electronic communications services.
Chapter IV sets out the supervision and enforcement of this Regulation and entrusts it to the
supervisory authorities in charge of the GDPR, in view of the strong synergies between
general data protection issues and confidentiality of communications (Article 18). The powers
of the European Data Protection Board are extended (Article 19) and the cooperation and
consistency mechanism foreseen under the GDPR will apply in case of cross-border matters
related to this Regulation (Article 20).

Chapter V details the various remedies available to end-users (Articles 21 and 22) and the
penalties that can be imposed (Article 24), including the general conditions for imposing
administrative fines (Article 23).
Chapter VI relates to the adoption of delegated and implementing acts in accordance with
Article 290 and 291 of the Treaty.
Finally, Chapter VII contains the final provisions of this Regulation: the repeal of ePrivacy
Directive, the monitoring and review, the entry into force and application. Concerning the
review, the Commission intends to evaluate, inter alia, whether a separate legal act remains
necessary in the light of legal, technical or economic developments and taking into account
the first evaluation of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 which is due by 25 May 2020.

2017/0003 (COD)
Proposal for a
REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
concerning the respect for private life and the protection of personal data in electronic
communications and repealing Directive 2002/58/EC (Regulation on Privacy and
Electronic Communications)
(Text with EEA relevance)

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular
Articles 16 and 114 thereof,
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee1,
Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions2,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor3,
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,
Whereas:
(1)

Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ("the Charter")
protects the fundamental right of everyone to the respect for his or her private and
family life, home and communications. Respect for the privacy of one’s
communications is an essential dimension of this right. Confidentiality of electronic
communications ensures that information exchanged between parties and the external
elements of such communication, including when the information has been sent, from
where, to whom, is not to be revealed to anyone other than to the parties involved in a
communication. The principle of confidentiality should apply to current and future
means of communication, including calls, internet access, instant messaging
applications, e-mail, internet phone calls and personal messaging provided through
social media.

(2)

The content of electronic communications may reveal highly sensitive information
about the natural persons involved in the communication, from personal experiences
and emotions to medical conditions, sexual preferences and political views, the
disclosure of which could result in personal and social harm, economic loss or
embarrassment. Similarly, metadata derived from electronic communications may also
reveal very sensitive and personal information. These metadata includes the numbers
called, the websites visited, geographical location, the time, date and duration when an
individual made a call etc., allowing precise conclusions to be drawn regarding the

1

OJ C , , p. .
OJ C , , p. .
OJ C , , p. .

2
3

private lives of the persons involved in the electronic communication, such as their
social relationships, their habits and activities of everyday life, their interests, tastes
etc.
(3)

Electronic communications data may also reveal information concerning legal entities,
such as business secrets or other sensitive information that has economic value.
Therefore, the provisions of this Regulation should apply to both natural and legal
persons. Furthermore, this Regulation should ensure that provisions of the Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council4, also apply to endusers who are legal persons. This includes the definition of consent under Regulation
(EU) 2016/679. When reference is made to consent by an end-user, including legal
persons, this definition should apply. In addition, legal persons should have the same
rights as end-users that are natural persons regarding the supervisory authorities;
furthermore, supervisory authorities under this Regulation should also be responsible
for monitoring the application of this Regulation regarding legal persons.

(4)

Pursuant to Article 8(1) of the Charter and Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union, everyone has the right to the protection of
personal data concerning him or her. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 lays down rules
relating to the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal
data and rules relating to the free movement of personal data. Electronic
communications data may include personal data as defined in Regulation (EU)
2016/679.

(5)

The provisions of this Regulation particularise and complement the general rules on
the protection of personal data laid down in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 as regards
electronic communications data that qualify as personal data. This Regulation
therefore does not lower the level of protection enjoyed by natural persons under
Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Processing of electronic communications data by providers
of electronic communications services should only be permitted in accordance with
this Regulation.

(6)

While the principles and main provisions of Directive 2002/58/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council5 remain generally sound, that Directive has not fully
kept pace with the evolution of technological and market reality, resulting in an
inconsistent or insufficient effective protection of privacy and confidentiality in
relation to electronic communications. Those developments include the entrance on
the market of electronic communications services that from a consumer perspective
are substitutable to traditional services, but do not have to comply with the same set of
rules. Another development concerns new techniques that allow for tracking of online
behaviour of end-users, which are not covered by Directive 2002/58/EC. Directive
2002/58/EC should therefore be repealed and replaced by this Regulation.

(7)

The Member States should be allowed, within the limits of this Regulation, to
maintain or introduce national provisions to further specify and clarify the application
of the rules of this Regulation in order to ensure an effective application and
interpretation of those rules. Therefore, the margin of discretion, which Member States

4

Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (OJ L 119, 4.5.2016,
p. 1–88).
Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector
(Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p.37).

5

have in this regard, should maintain a balance between the protection of private life
and personal data and the free movement of electronic communications data.
(8)

This Regulation should apply to providers of electronic communications services, to
providers of publicly available directories, and to software providers permitting
electronic communications, including the retrieval and presentation of information on
the internet. This Regulation should also apply to natural and legal persons who use
electronic communications services to send direct marketing commercial
communications or collect information related to or stored in end-users’ terminal
equipment.

(9)

This Regulation should apply to electronic communications data processed in
connection with the provision and use of electronic communications services in the
Union, regardless of whether or not the processing takes place in the Union. Moreover,
in order not to deprive end-users in the Union of effective protection, this Regulation
should also apply to electronic communications data processed in connection with the
provision of electronic communications services from outside the Union to end-users
in the Union.

(10)

Radio equipment and its software which is placed on the internal market in the Union,
must comply with Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council6. This Regulation should not affect the applicability of any of the
requirements of Directive 2014/53/EU nor the power of the Commission to adopt
delegated acts pursuant to Directive 2014/53/EU requiring that specific categories or
classes of radio equipment incorporate safeguards to ensure that personal data and
privacy of end-users are protected.

(11)

The services used for communications purposes, and the technical means of their
delivery, have evolved considerably. End-users increasingly replace traditional voice
telephony, text messages (SMS) and electronic mail conveyance services in favour of
functionally equivalent online services such as Voice over IP, messaging services and
web-based e-mail services. In order to ensure an effective and equal protection of endusers when using functionally equivalent services, this Regulation uses the definition
of electronic communications services set forth in the [Directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Electronic Communications
Code7]. That definition encompasses not only internet access services and services
consisting wholly or partly in the conveyance of signals but also interpersonal
communications services, which may or may not be number-based, such as for
example, Voice over IP, messaging services and web-based e-mail services. The
protection of confidentiality of communications is crucial also as regards interpersonal
communications services that are ancillary to another service; therefore, such type of
services also having a communication functionality should be covered by this
Regulation.

(12)

Connected devices and machines increasingly communicate with each other by using
electronic communications networks (Internet of Things). The transmission of
machine-to-machine communications involves the conveyance of signals over a
network and, hence, usually constitutes an electronic communications service. In order
to ensure full protection of the rights to privacy and confidentiality of

6

Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the
harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of radio
equipment and repealing Directive 1999/5/EC (OJ L 153, 22.5.2014, p. 62).
Commission proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the
European Electronic Communications Code (Recast) (COM/2016/0590 final - 2016/0288 (COD)).

7

communications, and to promote a trusted and secure Internet of Things in the digital
single market, it is necessary to clarify that this Regulation should apply to the
transmission of machine-to-machine communications. Therefore, the principle of
confidentiality enshrined in this Regulation should also apply to the transmission of
machine-to-machine communications. Specific safeguards could also be adopted under
sectorial legislation, as for instance Directive 2014/53/EU.
(13)

The development of fast and efficient wireless technologies has fostered the increasing
availability for the public of internet access via wireless networks accessible by
anyone in public and semi-private spaces such as 'hotspots' situated at different places
within a city, department stores, shopping malls and hospitals. To the extent that those
communications networks are provided to an undefined group of end-users, the
confidentiality of the communications transmitted through such networks should be
protected. The fact that wireless electronic communications services may be ancillary
to other services should not stand in the way of ensuring the protection of
confidentiality of communications data and application of this Regulation. Therefore,
this Regulation should apply to electronic communications data using electronic
communications services and public communications networks. In contrast, this
Regulation should not apply to closed groups of end-users such as corporate networks,
access to which is limited to members of the corporation.

(14)

Electronic communications data should be defined in a sufficiently broad and
technology neutral way so as to encompass any information concerning the content
transmitted or exchanged (electronic communications content) and the information
concerning an end-user of electronic communications services processed for the
purposes of transmitting, distributing or enabling the exchange of electronic
communications content; including data to trace and identify the source and
destination of a communication, geographical location and the date, time, duration and
the type of communication. Whether such signals and the related data are conveyed by
wire, radio, optical or electromagnetic means, including satellite networks, cable
networks, fixed (circuit- and packet-switched, including internet) and mobile terrestrial
networks, electricity cable systems, the data related to such signals should be
considered as electronic communications metadata and therefore be subject to the
provisions of this Regulation. Electronic communications metadata may include
information that is part of the subscription to the service when such information is
processed for the purposes of transmitting, distributing or exchanging electronic
communications content.

(15)

Electronic communications data should be treated as confidential. This means that any
interference with the transmission of electronic communications data, whether directly
by human intervention or through the intermediation of automated processing by
machines, without the consent of all the communicating parties should be prohibited.
The prohibition of interception of communications data should apply during their
conveyance, i.e. until receipt of the content of the electronic communication by the
intended addressee. Interception of electronic communications data may occur, for
example, when someone other than the communicating parties, listens to calls, reads,
scans or stores the content of electronic communications, or the associated metadata
for purposes other than the exchange of communications. Interception also occurs
when third parties monitor websites visited, timing of the visits, interaction with
others, etc., without the consent of the end-user concerned. As technology evolves, the
technical ways to engage in interception have also increased. Such ways may range
from the installation of equipment that gathers data from terminal equipment over
targeted areas, such as the so-called IMSI (International Mobile Subscriber Identity)
catchers, to programs and techniques that, for example, surreptitiously monitor

browsing habits for the purpose of creating end-user profiles. Other examples of
interception include capturing payload data or content data from unencrypted wireless
networks and routers, including browsing habits without the end-users' consent.
(16)

The prohibition of storage of communications is not intended to prohibit any
automatic, intermediate and transient storage of this information insofar as this takes
place for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission in the electronic
communications network. It should not prohibit either the processing of electronic
communications data to ensure the security and continuity of the electronic
communications services, including checking security threats such as the presence of
malware or the processing of metadata to ensure the necessary quality of service
requirements, such as latency, jitter etc.

(17)

The processing of electronic communications data can be useful for businesses,
consumers and society as a whole. Vis-à-vis Directive 2002/58/EC, this Regulation
broadens the possibilities for providers of electronic communications services to
process electronic communications metadata, based on end-users consent. However,
end-users attach great importance to the confidentiality of their communications,
including their online activities, and that they want to control the use of electronic
communications data for purposes other than conveying the communication.
Therefore, this Regulation should require providers of electronic communications
services to obtain end-users' consent to process electronic communications metadata,
which should include data on the location of the device generated for the purposes of
granting and maintaining access and connection to the service. Location data that is
generated other than in the context of providing electronic communications services
should not be considered as metadata. Examples of commercial usages of electronic
communications metadata by providers of electronic communications services may
include the provision of heatmaps; a graphical representation of data using colors to
indicate the presence of individuals. To display the traffic movements in certain
directions during a certain period of time, an identifier is necessary to link the
positions of individuals at certain time intervals. This identifier would be missing if
anonymous data were to be used and such movement could not be displayed. Such
usage of electronic communications metadata could, for example, benefit public
authorities and public transport operators to define where to develop new
infrastructure, based on the usage of and pressure on the existing structure. Where a
type of processing of electronic communications metadata, in particular using new
technologies, and taking into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of the
processing, is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural
persons, a data protection impact assessment and, as the case may be, a consultation of
the supervisory authority should take place prior to the processing, in accordance with
Articles 35 and 36 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

(18)

End-users may consent to the processing of their metadata to receive specific services
such as protection services against fraudulent activities (by analysing usage data,
location and customer account in real time). In the digital economy, services are often
supplied against counter-performance other than money, for instance by end-users
being exposed to advertisements. For the purposes of this Regulation, consent of an
end-user, regardless of whether the latter is a natural or a legal person, should have the
same meaning and be subject to the same conditions as the data subject's consent
under Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Basic broadband internet access and voice
communications services are to be considered as essential services for individuals to
be able to communicate and participate to the benefits of the digital economy. Consent
for processing data from internet or voice communication usage will not be valid if the

data subject has no genuine and free choice, or is unable to refuse or withdraw consent
without detriment.
(19)

The content of electronic communications pertains to the essence of the fundamental
right to respect for private and family life, home and communications protected under
Article 7 of the Charter. Any interference with the content of electronic
communications should be allowed only under very clear defined conditions, for
specific purposes and be subject to adequate safeguards against abuse. This Regulation
provides for the possibility of providers of electronic communications services to
process electronic communications data in transit, with the informed consent of all the
end-users concerned. For example, providers may offer services that entail the
scanning of emails to remove certain pre-defined material. Given the sensitivity of the
content of communications, this Regulation sets forth a presumption that the
processing of such content data will result in high risks to the rights and freedoms of
natural persons. When processing such type of data, the provider of the electronic
communications service should always consult the supervisory authority prior to the
processing. Such consultation should be in accordance with Article 36 (2) and (3) of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679. The presumption does not encompass the processing of
content data to provide a service requested by the end-user where the end-user has
consented to such processing and it is carried out for the purposes and duration strictly
necessary and proportionate for such service. After electronic communications content
has been sent by the end-user and received by the intended end-user or end-users, it
may be recorded or stored by the end-user, end-users or by a third party entrusted by
them to record or store such data. Any processing of such data must comply with
Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

(20)

Terminal equipment of end-users of electronic communications networks and any
information relating to the usage of such terminal equipment, whether in particular is
stored in or emitted by such equipment, requested from or processed in order to enable
it to connect to another device and or network equipment, are part of the private sphere
of the end-users requiring protection under the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. Given that such equipment contains or processes information
that may reveal details of an individual's emotional, political, social complexities,
including the content of communications, pictures, the location of individuals by
accessing the device’s GPS capabilities, contact lists, and other information already
stored in the device, the information related to such equipment requires enhanced
privacy protection. Furthermore, the so-called spyware, web bugs, hidden identifiers,
tracking cookies and other similar unwanted tracking tools can enter end-user's
terminal equipment without their knowledge in order to gain access to information, to
store hidden information and to trace the activities. Information related to the enduser’s device may also be collected remotely for the purpose of identification and
tracking, using techniques such as the so-called ‘device fingerprinting’, often without
the knowledge of the end-user, and may seriously intrude upon the privacy of these
end-users. Techniques that surreptitiously monitor the actions of end-users, for
example by tracking their activities online or the location of their terminal equipment,
or subvert the operation of the end-users’ terminal equipment pose a serious threat to
the privacy of end-users. Therefore, any such interference with the end-user's terminal
equipment should be allowed only with the end-user's consent and for specific and
transparent purposes.

(21)

Exceptions to the obligation to obtain consent to make use of the processing and
storage capabilities of terminal equipment or to access information stored in terminal
equipment should be limited to situations that involve no, or only very limited,

intrusion of privacy. For instance, consent should not be requested for authorizing the
technical storage or access which is strictly necessary and proportionate for the
legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the
end-user. This may include the storing of cookies for the duration of a single
established session on a website to keep track of the end-user’s input when filling in
online forms over several pages. Cookies can also be a legitimate and useful tool, for
example, in measuring web traffic to a website. Information society providers that
engage in configuration checking to provide the service in compliance with the enduser's settings and the mere logging of the fact that the end-user’s device is unable to
receive content requested by the end-user should not constitute access to such a device
or use of the device processing capabilities.
(22)

The methods used for providing information and obtaining end-user's consent should
be as user-friendly as possible. Given the ubiquitous use of tracking cookies and other
tracking techniques, end-users are increasingly requested to provide consent to store
such tracking cookies in their terminal equipment. As a result, end-users are
overloaded with requests to provide consent. The use of technical means to provide
consent, for example, through transparent and user-friendly settings, may address this
problem. Therefore, this Regulation should provide for the possibility to express
consent by using the appropriate settings of a browser or other application. The
choices made by end-users when establishing its general privacy settings of a browser
or other application should be binding on, and enforceable against, any third parties.
Web browsers are a type of software application that permits the retrieval and
presentation of information on the internet. Other types of applications, such as the
ones that permit calling and messaging or provide route guidance, have also the same
capabilities. Web browsers mediate much of what occurs between the end-user and the
website. From this perspective, they are in a privileged position to play an active role
to help the end-user to control the flow of information to and from the terminal
equipment. More particularly web browsers may be used as gatekeepers, thus helping
end-users to prevent information from their terminal equipment (for example smart
phone, tablet or computer) from being accessed or stored.

(23)

The principles of data protection by design and by default were codified under Article
25 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Currently, the default settings for cookies are set in
most current browsers to ‘accept all cookies’. Therefore providers of software
enabling the retrieval and presentation of information on the internet should have an
obligation to configure the software so that it offers the option to prevent third parties
from storing information on the terminal equipment; this is often presented as ‘reject
third party cookies’. End-users should be offered a set of privacy setting options,
ranging from higher (for example, ‘never accept cookies’) to lower (for example,
‘always accept cookies’) and intermediate (for example, ‘reject third party cookies’ or
‘only accept first party cookies’). Such privacy settings should be presented in a an
easily visible and intelligible manner.

(24)

For web browsers to be able to obtain end-users’ consent as defined under Regulation
(EU) 2016/679, for example, to the storage of third party tracking cookies, they
should, among others, require a clear affirmative action from the end-user of terminal
equipment to signify his or her freely given, specific informed, and unambiguous
agreement to the storage and access of such cookies in and from the terminal
equipment. Such action may be considered to be affirmative, for example, if end-users
are required to actively select ‘accept third party cookies’ to confirm their agreement
and are given the necessary information to make the choice. To this end, it is necessary
to require providers of software enabling access to internet that, at the moment of
installation, end-users are informed about the possibility to choose the privacy settings

among the various options and ask them to make a choice. Information provided
should not dissuade end-users from selecting higher privacy settings and should
include relevant information about the risks associated to allowing third party cookies
to be stored in the computer, including the compilation of long-term records of
individuals' browsing histories and the use of such records to send targeted
advertising. Web browsers are encouraged to provide easy ways for end-users to
change the privacy settings at any time during use and to allow the user to make
exceptions for or to whitelist certain websites or to specify for which websites (third)
party cookies are always or never allowed.
(25)

Accessing electronic communications networks requires the regular emission of
certain data packets in order to discover or maintain a connection with the network or
other devices on the network. Furthermore, devices must have a unique address
assigned in order to be identifiable on that network. Wireless and cellular telephone
standards similarly involve the emission of active signals containing unique identifiers
such as a MAC address, the IMEI (International Mobile Station Equipment Identity),
the IMSI etc. A single wireless base station (i.e. a transmitter and receiver), such as a
wireless access point, has a specific range within which such information may be
captured. Service providers have emerged who offer tracking services based on the
scanning of equipment related information with diverse functionalities, including
people counting, providing data on the number of people waiting in line, ascertaining
the number of people in a specific area, etc. This information may be used for more
intrusive purposes, such as to send commercial messages to end-users, for example
when they enter stores, with personalized offers. While some of these functionalities
do not entail high privacy risks, others do, for example, those involving the tracking of
individuals over time, including repeated visits to specified locations. Providers
engaged in such practices should display prominent notices located on the edge of the
area of coverage informing end-users prior to entering the defined area that the
technology is in operation within a given perimeter, the purpose of the tracking, the
person responsible for it and the existence of any measure the end-user of the terminal
equipment can take to minimize or stop the collection. Additional information should
be provided where personal data are collected pursuant to Article 13 of Regulation
(EU) 2016/679.

(26)

When the processing of electronic communications data by providers of electronic
communications services falls within its scope, this Regulation should provide for the
possibility for the Union or Member States under specific conditions to restrict by law
certain obligations and rights when such a restriction constitutes a necessary and
proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard specific public interests,
including national security, defence, public security and the prevention, investigation,
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security and
other important objectives of general public interest of the Union or of a Member
State, in particular an important economic or financial interest of the Union or of a
Member State, or a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected to the
exercise of official authority for such interests. Therefore, this Regulation should not
affect the ability of Member States to carry out lawful interception of electronic
communications or take other measures, if necessary and proportionate to safeguard
the public interests mentioned above, in accordance with the Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the European Union and the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as interpreted by the Court of Justice of
the European Union and of the European Court of Human Rights. Providers of
electronic communications services should provide for appropriate procedures to

facilitate legitimate requests of competent authorities, where relevant also taking into
account the role of the representative designated pursuant to Article 3(3).
(27)

As regards calling line identification, it is necessary to protect the right of the calling
party to withhold the presentation of the identification of the line from which the call
is being made and the right of the called party to reject calls from unidentified lines.
Certain end-users, in particular help lines, and similar organisations, have an interest
in guaranteeing the anonymity of their callers. As regards connected line
identification, it is necessary to protect the right and the legitimate interest of the
called party to withhold the presentation of the identification of the line to which the
calling party is actually connected.

(28)

There is justification for overriding the elimination of calling line identification
presentation in specific cases. End-users' rights to privacy with regard to calling line
identification should be restricted where this is necessary to trace nuisance calls and
with regard to calling line identification and location data where this is necessary to
allow emergency services, such as eCall, to carry out their tasks as effectively as
possible.

(29)

Technology exists that enables providers of electronic communications services to
limit the reception of unwanted calls by end-users in different ways, including
blocking silent calls and other fraudulent and nuisance calls. Providers of publicly
available number-based interpersonal communications services should deploy this
technology and protect end-users against nuisance calls and free of charge. Providers
should ensure that end-users are aware of the existence of such functionalities, for
instance, by publicising the fact on their webpage.

(30)

Publicly available directories of end-users of electronic communications services are
widely distributed. Publicly available directories means any directory or service
containing end-users information such as phone numbers (including mobile phone
numbers), email address contact details and includes inquiry services. The right to
privacy and to protection of the personal data of a natural person requires that endusers that are natural persons are asked for consent before their personal data are
included in a directory. The legitimate interest of legal entities requires that end-users
that are legal entities have the right to object to the data related to them being included
in a directory.

(31)

If end-users that are natural persons give their consent to their data being included in
such directories, they should be able to determine on a consent basis which categories
of personal data are included in the directory (for example name, email address, home
address, user name, phone number). In addition, providers of publicly available
directories should inform the end-users of the purposes of the directory and of the
search functions of the directory before including them in that directory. End-users
should be able to determine by consent on the basis of which categories of personal
data their contact details can be searched. The categories of personal data included in
the directory and the categories of personal data on the basis of which the end-user's
contact details can be searched should not necessarily be the same.

(32)

In this Regulation, direct marketing refers to any form of advertising by which a
natural or legal person sends direct marketing communications directly to one or more
identified or identifiable end-users using electronic communications services. In
addition to the offering of products and services for commercial purposes, this should
also include messages sent by political parties that contact natural persons via
electronic communications services in order to promote their parties. The same should
apply to messages sent by other non-profit organisations to support the purposes of the
organisation.

(33)

Safeguards should be provided to protect end-users against unsolicited
communications for direct marketing purposes, which intrude into the private life of
end-users. The degree of privacy intrusion and nuisance is considered relatively
similar independently of the wide range of technologies and channels used to conduct
these electronic communications, whether using automated calling and communication
systems, instant messaging applications, emails, SMS, MMS, Bluetooth, etc. It is
therefore justified to require that consent of the end-user is obtained before
commercial electronic communications for direct marketing purposes are sent to endusers in order to effectively protect individuals against the intrusion into their private
life as well as the legitimate interest of legal persons. Legal certainty and the need to
ensure that the rules protecting against unsolicited electronic communications remain
future-proof justify the need to define a single set of rules that do not vary according to
the technology used to convey these unsolicited communications, while at the same
time guaranteeing an equivalent level of protection for all citizens throughout the
Union. However, it is reasonable to allow the use of e-mail contact details within the
context of an existing customer relationship for the offering of similar products or
services. Such possibility should only apply to the same company that has obtained the
electronic contact details in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.