Article 7 Storage and erasure of electronic communications data 1.

Without prejudice to point (b) of Article 6(1) and points (a) and (b) of Article 6(3), the provider of the
electronic communications service shall erase electronic communications content or make that data anonymous
after receipt of electronic communication content by the intended recipient or recipients.

Such data may be recorded or stored by the end-users or by a third party entrusted by them to record, store
or otherwise process such data, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

2.Without prejudice to point (b) of Article 6(1) and points (a) and (c) of Article 6(2), the provider of the
electronic communications service shall erase electronic communications metadata or make that data anonymous
when it is no longer needed for the purpose of the transmission of a communication.

11 Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 laying down
measures concerning open internet access and amending Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users’
rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming
on public mobile communications networks within the Union (OJ L 310, 26.11.

2015, p.1–18).

3.Where the processing of electronic communications metadata takes place for the purpose of billing in
accordance with point (b) of Article 6(2), the relevant metadata may be kept until the end of the period
during which a bill may lawfully be challenged or a payment may be pursued in accordance with national law.

Article 8 Protection of information stored in and related to end-users’ terminal equipment 1.

The use of processing and storage capabilities of terminal equipment and the collection of information from
end-users’ terminal equipment, including about its software and hardware, other than by the end-user
concerned shall be prohibited, except on the following grounds: (a) it is necessary for the sole purpose of
carrying out the transmission of an electronic communication over an electronic communications network; or (
b) the end-user has given his or her consent; or (c) it is necessary for providing an information society
service requested by the enduser; or (d) if it is necessary for web audience measuring, provided that such
measurement is carried out by the provider of the information society service requested by the enduser.

2.The collection of information emitted by terminal equipment to enable it to connect to another device and,
or to network equipment shall be prohibited, except if: (a) it is done exclusively in order to, for the time
necessary for, and for the purpose of establishing a connection; or (b) a clear and prominent notice is
displayed informing of, at least, the modalities of the collection, its purpose, the person responsible for
it and the other information required under Article 13 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 where personal data are
collected, as well as any measure the end-user of the terminal equipment can take to stop or minimise the
collection.

The collection of such information shall be conditional on the application of appropriate technical and
organisational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risks, as set out in Article 32 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679, have been applied.

3.The information to be provided pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 2 may be provided in combination with
standardized icons in order to give a meaningful overview of the collection in an easily visible,
intelligible and clearly legible manner.

4.The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 27 determining the
information to be presented by the standardized icon and the procedures for providing standardized icons.

Article 9 Consent 1.

The definition of and conditions for consent provided for under Articles 4(11) and 7 of Regulation (EU)
2016/679/EU shall apply.

2.Without prejudice to paragraph 1, where technically possible and feasible, for the purposes of point (b) of
Article 8(1), consent may be expressed by using the appropriate technical settings of a software application
enabling access to the internet.

3.End-users who have consented to the processing of electronic communications data as set out in point (c) of
Article 6(2) and points (a) and (b) of Article 6(3) shall be given the possibility to withdraw their consent
at any time as set forth under Article 7(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and be reminded of this possibility
at periodic intervals of 6 months, as long as the processing continues.

Article 10 Information and options for privacy settings to be provided 1.

Software placed on the market permitting electronic communications, including the retrieval and presentation
of information on the internet, shall offer the option to prevent third parties from storing information on
the terminal equipment of an enduser or processing information already stored on that equipment.

2.Upon installation, the software shall inform the end-user about the privacy settings options and, to
continue with the installation, require the end-user to consent to a setting.

3.In the case of software which has already been installed on 25 May 2018, the requirements under paragraphs
1 and 2 shall be complied with at the time of the first update of the software, but no later than 25 August
2018.

Article 11 Restrictions 1.

Union or Member State law may restrict by way of a legislative measure the scope of the obligations and
rights provided for in Articles 5 to 8 where such a restriction respects the essence of the fundamental
rights and freedoms and is a necessary, appropriate and proportionate measure in a democratic society to
safeguard one or more of the general public interests referred to in Article 23(1) (a) to (e) of Regulation (
EU) 2016/679 or a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected to the exercise of official
authority for such interests.

2.Providers of electronic communications services shall establish internal procedures for responding to
requests for access to end-users’ electronic communications data based on a legislative measure adopted
pursuant to paragraph 1.

They shall provide the competent supervisory authority, on demand, with information about those procedures,
the number of requests received, the legal justification invoked and their response.

CHAPTER III NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS' RIGHTS TO CONTROL ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS Article 12 Presentation
and restriction of calling and connected line identification 1.

Where presentation of the calling and connected line identification is offered in accordance with Article [
107] of the [Directive establishing the European Electronic Communication Code], the providers of publicly
available number-based interpersonal communications services shall provide the following: (a) the calling end-
user with the possibility of preventing the presentation of the calling line identification on a per call,
per connection or permanent basis; (b) the called end-user with the possibility of preventing the
presentation of the calling line identification of incoming calls; (c) the called end-user with the
possibility of rejecting incoming calls where the presentation of the calling line identification has been
prevented by the calling enduser; (d) the called end-user with the possibility of preventing the presentation
of the connected line identification to the calling end-user.

2.The possibilities referred to in points (a), (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 1 shall be provided to end-users
by simple means and free of charge.

3.Point (a) of paragraph 1 shall also apply with regard to calls to third countries originating in the Union.

Points (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 1 shall also apply to incoming calls originating in third countries.

4.Where presentation of calling or connected line identification is offered, providers of publicly available
number-based interpersonal communications services shall provide information to the public regarding the
options set out in points (a), (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 1.

Article 13 Exceptions to presentation and restriction of calling and connected line identification 1.

Regardless of whether the calling end-user has prevented the presentation of the calling line identification,
where a call is made to emergency services, providers of publicly available number-based interpersonal
communications services shall override the elimination of the presentation of the calling line identification
and the denial or absence of consent of an end-user for the processing of metadata, on a perline basis for
organisations dealing with emergency communications, including public safety answering points, for the
purpose of responding to such communications.

2.Member States shall establish more specific provisions with regard to the establishment of procedures and
the circumstances where providers of publicly available number-based interpersonal communication services
shall override the elimination of the presentation of the calling line identification on a temporary basis,
where end-users request the tracing of malicious or nuisance calls.

Article 14 Incoming call blocking Providers of publicly available number-based interpersonal communications
services shall deploy state of the art measures to limit the reception of unwanted calls by end-users and
shall also provide the called end-user with the following possibilities, free of charge: (a) to block
incoming calls from specific numbers or from anonymous sources; (b) to stop automatic call forwarding by a
third party to the end-user's terminal equipment.

Article 15 Publicly available directories 1.

The providers of publicly available directories shall obtain the consent of end-users who are natural persons
to include their personal data in the directory and, consequently, shall obtain consent from these end-users
for inclusion of data per category of personal data, to the extent that such data are relevant for the
purpose of the directory as determined by the provider of the directory.

Providers shall give endusers who are natural persons the means to verify, correct and delete such data.

2.The providers of a publicly available directory shall inform end-users who are natural persons whose
personal data are in the directory of the available search functions of the directory and obtain end-users’
consent before enabling such search functions related to their own data.

3.The providers of publicly available directories shall provide end-users that are legal persons with the
possibility to object to data related to them being included in the directory.

Providers shall give such end-users that are legal persons the means to verify, correct and delete such data.

4.The possibility for end-users not to be included in a publicly available directory, or to verify, correct
and delete any data related to them shall be provided free of charge.

Article 16 Unsolicited communications 1.

Natural or legal persons may use electronic communications services for the purposes of sending direct
marketing communications to end-users who are natural persons that have given their consent.

2.Where a natural or legal person obtains electronic contact details for electronic mail from its customer,
in the context of the sale of a product or a service, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, that
natural or legal person may use these electronic contact details for direct marketing of its own similar
products or services only if customers are clearly and distinctly given the opportunity to object, free of
charge and in an easy manner, to such use.

The right to object shall be given at the time of collection and each time a message is sent.

3.Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, natural or legal persons using electronic communications services
for the purposes of placing direct marketing calls shall: (a) present the identity of a line on which they
can be contacted; or (b) present a specific code/or prefix identifying the fact that the call is a marketing
call.

4.Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Member States may provide by law that the placing of direct marketing voice-to-
voice calls to end-users who are natural persons shall only be allowed in respect of end-users who are
natural persons who have not expressed their objection to receiving those communications.

5.Member States shall ensure, in the framework of Union law and applicable national law, that the legitimate
interest of end-users that are legal persons with regard to unsolicited communications sent by means set
forth under paragraph 1 are sufficiently protected.

6.Any natural or legal person using electronic communications services to transmit direct marketing
communications shall inform end-users of the marketing nature of the communication and the identity of the
legal or natural person on behalf of whom the communication is transmitted and shall provide the necessary
information for recipients to exercise their right to withdraw their consent, in an easy manner, to receiving
further marketing communications.

7.The Commission shall be empowered to adopt implementing measures in accordance with Article 26(2)
specifying the code/or prefix to identify marketing calls, pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 3.

Article 17 Information about detected security risks In the case of a particular risk that may compromise the
security of networks and electronic communications services, the provider of an electronic communications
service shall inform end-users concerning such risk and, where the risk lies outside the scope of the
measures to be taken by the service provider, inform end-users of any possible remedies, including an
indication of the likely costs involved.

CHAPTER IV INDEPENDENT SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES AND ENFORCEMENT Article 18 Independent supervisory authorities
1.

The independent supervisory authority or authorities responsible for monitoring the application of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall also be responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation.

Chapter VI and VII of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

The tasks and powers of the supervisory authorities shall be exercised with regard to end-users.

2.The supervisory authority or authorities referred to in paragraph 1 shall cooperate whenever appropriate
with national regulatory authorities established pursuant to the [Directive Establishing the European
Electronic Communications Code].

Article 19 European Data Protection Board The European Data Protection Board, established under Article 68 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679, shall have competence to ensure the consistent application of this Regulation.

To that end, the European Data Protection Board shall exercise the tasks laid down in Article 70 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

The Board shall also have the following tasks: (a) advise the Commission on any proposed amendment of this
Regulation; (b) examine, on its own initiative, on request of one of its members or on request of the
Commission, any question covering the application of this Regulation and issue guidelines, recommendations
and best practices in order to encourage consistent application of this Regulation.

Article 20 Cooperation and consistency procedures Each supervisory authority shall contribute to the
consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union.

For this purpose, the supervisory authorities shall cooperate with each other and the Commission in
accordance with Chapter VII of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 regarding the matters covered by this Regulation.

CHAPTER V REMEDIES, LIABILITY AND PENALTIES Article 21 Remedies 1.

Without prejudice to any other administrative or judicial remedy, every end-user of electronic communications
services shall have the same remedies provided for in Articles 77, 78, and 79 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

2.Any natural or legal person other than end-users adversely affected by infringements of this Regulation and
having a legitimate interest in the cessation or prohibition of alleged infringements, including a provider
of electronic communications services protecting its legitimate business interests, shall have a right to
bring legal proceedings in respect of such infringements.

Article 22 Right to compensation and liability Any end-user of electronic communications services who has
suffered material or nonmaterial damage as a result of an infringement of this Regulation shall have the
right to receive compensation from the infringer for the damage suffered, unless the infringer proves that it
is not in any way responsible for the event giving rise to the damage in accordance with Article 82 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

Article 23 General conditions for imposing administrative fines 1.

For the purpose of this Article, Chapter VII of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall apply to infringements of this
Regulation.

2.Infringements of the following provisions of this Regulation shall, in accordance with paragraph 1, be
subject to administrative fines up to EUR 10 000 000, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2 % of the
total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is higher: (a) the obligations of
any legal or natural person who process electronic communications data pursuant to Article 8; (b) the
obligations of the provider of software enabling electronic communications, pursuant to Article 10; (c) the
obligations of the providers of publicly available directories pursuant to Article 15; (d) the obligations of
any legal or natural person who uses electronic communications services pursuant to Article 16.

3.Infringements of the principle of confidentiality of communications, permitted processing of electronic
communications data, time limits for erasure pursuant to Articles 5, 6, and 7 shall, in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this Article, be subject to administrative fines up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an
undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is
higher.

4.Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties for infringements of Articles 12, 13, 14, and 17.

5.Non-compliance with an order by a supervisory authority as referred to in Article 18, shall be subject to
administrative fines up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwide
annual turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is higher.

6.Without prejudice to the corrective powers of supervisory authorities pursuant to Article 18, each Member
State may lay down rules on whether and to what extent administrative fines may be imposed on public
authorities and bodies established in that Member State.

7.The exercise by the supervisory authority of its powers under this Article shall be subject to appropriate
procedural safeguards in accordance with Union and Member State law, including effective judicial remedy and
due process.

8.Where the legal system of the Member State does not provide for administrative fines, this Article may be
applied in such a manner that the fine is initiated by the competent supervisory authority and imposed by
competent national courts, while ensuring that those legal remedies are effective and have an equivalent
effect to the administrative fines imposed by supervisory authorities.

In any event, the fines imposed shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

Those Member States shall notify to the Commission the provisions of their laws which they adopt pursuant to
this paragraph by [xxx] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment law or amendment affecting them.

Article 24 Penalties 1.

Member States shall lay down the rules on other penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation in
particular for infringements which are not subject to administrative fines pursuant to Article 23, and shall
take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented.

Such penalties shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

2.Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provisions of its law which it adopts pursuant to
paragraph 1, no later than 18 months after the date set forth under Article 29(2) and, without delay, any
subsequent amendment affecting them.

CHAPTER VI DELEGATED ACTS AND IMPLEMENTING ACTS Article 25 Exercise of the delegation 1.

The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this
Article.

2.The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 8(4) shall be conferred on the Commission for an
indeterminate period of time from [the data of entering into force of this Regulation].

3.The delegation of power referred to in Article 8(4) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament
or by the Council.

A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision.

It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the
European Union or at a later date specified therein.

It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.

4.Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in
accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Law-Making of 13 April
2016.

5.As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European
Parliament and to the Council.

6.A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 8(4) shall enter into force only if no objection has been
expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of
that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European
Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object.

That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

Article 26 Committee 1.

The Commission shall be assisted by the Communications Committee established under Article 110 of the [
Directive establishing the European Electronic Communications Code].

That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/201112.

2.Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

CHAPTER VII FINAL PROVISIONS Article 27 Repeal 1.

Directive 2002/58/EC is repealed with effect from 25 May 2018.

2.References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as references to this Regulation.

Article 28 Monitoring and evaluation clause By 1 January 2018 at the latest, the Commission shall establish a
detailed programme for monitoring the effectiveness of this Regulation.

No later than three years after the date of application of this Regulation, and every three years thereafter,
the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of this Regulation and present the main findings to the European
Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and 12 Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning
mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers (OJ L 55, 28.
2.2011, p.13–18).Social Committee.

The evaluation shall, where appropriate, inform a proposal for the amendment or repeal of this Regulation in
light of legal, technical or economic developments.

Article 29 Entry into force and application 1.

This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official
Journal of the European Union.

2.It shall apply from 25 May 2018.

This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Brussels, For the European Parliament The President For the Council The President